---
title: "Book: Smokestack Diplomacy"
date: 2013-05-09
categories: geography
tags: international
---

[Darst, R. G. (2001). *Smokestack diplomacy: cooperation and conflict in East-West environmental politics*. Cambridge, Mass, MIT Press.](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/44516646)

This book attempts to analyze the participation of the USSR in the Cold War era (1960s-1970s) and in the 1990s.  The author points out that the incentives for the USSR to sit at the negotiation table over international environmental issues are different in the two eras:  during the Cold War era, it was for establishing an image of cooperative nation, so as to avoid further isolation;  after the collapse of the soviet empire, the strategy was for gaining financial benefits from Western countries, this is called _the instrumental manipulation of external environmental concerns_.

The instrumental manipulation is mainly carried out through exploiting the policy used by Western countries in the post-Cold War era -- transnational subsidization.  Transnational subsidization causes the interesting result of moral hazards, polluter life extension, and blackmail.

Moral hazard

:     "a disposition on the part of individuals or organizations to engage in riskier behavior than they otherwise would, because of a tacit assumption that someone else will bear part or all of the costs and consequences if the incurred risk turns out badly".

Polluter life extension

:     Pollution source modernized to operate longer, albeit at lower pollution intensity and environmental cost, but the cleanest way is to shut them down altogether.

Environmental blackmail

:     "involves (1) the threat of a new or significantly expanded transboundary danger (i.e., a break with the status quo) and (2) threatening or initiating such an activity in the hope that external actors will pay one to refrain from continuing."

When reading the book, I cannot shake off the feeling that the author considers the Western countries victims of Russia and other former-USSR countries' manipulation.  Perhaps a book from a Russian or USSR perspective would be helpful.  Or, considering the similarity between China and Russia, a book on China's international environmental policy would be desirable.
