---
title: Create high-quality demand
date: 2013-07-15
categories: geography
tags: [economy]
---

There is a good review on recent years' global economy on [LARB website](http://lareviewofbooks.org/article.php?id=1845&fulltext=1).  The author acutely notices the phenomenon that despite our advanced technology and immense ability to produce, this generation feels less secure.  Labour looks much weaker when confronting capital compared to their counterparts a few decades ago.  The pursuit of trades less profitable seems horrible to imagine.  In short, our economy is in a bad shape, and this applies not only to the recent recession, but to the whole decade or so since the new millenium.

The author argues that the technology is partly to blame for our situation.  In human history, for each time innovation in institutions or technology brings higher productivity, the demand will soon catch up.  But we seem less sure about what to do with the benefit of information technology and cannot come up with new demands.  As a result, the enhanced efficiency means the capital needs less labour for the same amount of goods.  This leads to layoffs and reduced wage, which reduce demand.  This is inevitable for capitalism, but till 2007 we have managed to create enough demands to match our productivity -- by engaging in large national projects, by waging wars, by raising wages, by globalization, by bombarding consumers with advertisements, and recently by pouring hot money into real estate markets.  Now, these tricks will no longer work.

This is partly because the world is flater.  By outsourcing production to reduce cost, the demand can be maintained even when the wage in developed countries are diminishing in reality.  But China's difficulty in finding cheap labour and her leader's determination to change the industry structure has essentially terminated the age of large quantity of products at ridiculously low cost.  There used to be many "peripheral" countries providing cheap products, but as many of them begin to join the "core", products on the world market become more expensive.

One crucial question is why the development of peripheral countries has not brought significantly larger demand.  Apparently, the growth of demand takes much longer to propalgate than that of production.  Tell one how to make a car and build a factory, import parts from developed countries, and you suddenly have the ability to produce cars.  But to enable 20% of the population to buy a car, it would be a vastly complex and challenging job.  Moreover, "fast" consumer goods such as shampoo, cellphones, and luxury bags may soon build a robust consumer population without much effort; other goods, especially those related to culture, are more difficult to have growth in demands.

As long as our economy structure and mechanisms do not foundamentally change, we will have to consider how to create more demand to match our unprecedented productivity.  The author of the LARB article correctly points out that much of our demands now are to meet very basic needs.  We need to invest, not to increase productivity, but in infrastructures so demands to high value goods such as cars will increase, and more importantly, in education and culture so the next generation can have loftier goals to pursue, and utilize more of our productivity in the process.
